---
title: "Makefiles to improve your life"
author: Casper Andersson
date: "2022-10-19"
dofollows:
  - "https://casan.se"
categories:
  - "misc"
images:
  - /img/800/makefile_code.png
---

During development you may sometimes notice you run a lot of commands to set
up, build, test, and manage your project. Sometimes, these end up requiring
several steps, or you have trouble remembering the exact command. One way to
manage this is to set up aliases in your shell configuration. While this would
work fine for yourself and for a single build system, it would not be possible
to share it in a convenient manner.

One alternative is shell scripts, but a more popular and flexible way is
Makefiles. Make is a build automation tool originally made for building C
projects, but can be used for any task and programming language. However, every
language may not benefit as much as C does from it. Many languages today come
with already complete build systems; don't expect Make to replace them. It
would rather be a layer on top for adding custom build steps.

To use Make, start by creating a file called `Makefile`, usually in the root
directory of a project. This file is automatically used when invoking `make`.

Like many build systems, one of Make's key features is keeping track of file
changes. Make looks at the `last modified` field of a file to determine if it
should "build" it again. "build" in this context could be anything. It doesn't
have to be a compiler. It could be any shell command, even something as simple
as copying a file to another directory in preparation for the build step. It
could be a pre-build script to generate a file dynamically.

Here's a list of common Make commands to have and what they typically do.

## make

Without any arguments Make will run the first target specified in the makefile.
This is typically the `all` target, equivalent to `make all`. It should build
the whole program with all its dependencies. The command can be invoked
repeatedly to rebuild the program.

{{< cta1 >}}

## make run

Runs the program. Useful if the program needs some sort of setup before
starting the actual program. Maybe starting an emulator. If you happen to be
developing an OS it can start the kernel in a virtual machine.

## make install

Installs the program. Is usually invoked with `sudo` and after doing `make` to
build it first. Instructions in README files often looks like

```bash
make
sudo make install
```

Make can handle separate install instructions for Windows and Mac/Linux when
selecting where to install it. `install` should typically support `PREFIX=`
argument if the user wants to decide where to install it. Specifying
`PREFIX=/usr` will attempt to install it to `/usr/bin/`.

You can provide an `uninstall` target as well. But be careful to not delete any
third-party dependencies that other packages also depends on. Even if your
program installed it doesn't mean it is the only one using it.

## make clean

Removes any files generated by the build system. It provides a clean template
for doing a completely new build. Sometimes issues arise from partial builds
and cached data, in which case it is nice with an easy way to start from a
clean plate. Clean can be complemented with a `make distclean` that, on top of
doing a `make clean`, also removes any files created building external
dependencies (e.g., a submodule or downloaded files) to ascertain a totally
clean build.

## make dist

Create a release tarball. When doing an official release you may want to
package just the essential files (tends to not include .git), and sometimes
multiple tar, or even exe, files preconfigured for different platforms. This
will usually read the version name from a configuration file and use in the
filename.

## make doc

Builds documentation. A popular way to handle documentation is through a
website. This might generate the HTML from some other format, perhaps from
markdown files using Pandoc, or some tool that parses the code and comments.


## Example

We will use the below project structure.
```sh
|------------------------
|- Makefile
|- src/
|  |- default_config.json
|- output/
|  |- program.exe
-------------------------
```

In this scenario we want to copy the `default_config.json` to our `output/`
directory when building because `program.exe` requires it in the same folder
during runtime. To do this we will use Make's feature of keeping track of
changes. Whenever the default config is changed we want those changes to be
reflected in the output, just as if we changed a line of code. `output/` is not
checked into Git and exists only as a place to store the output of the build. It
could be created by the Makefile as well.

```make
output/default_config.json: src/default_config.json
	cp src/default_config.json output/default_config.json
```
In Make terminology this is called a `target`. The target is
`output/default_config.json`, which is the file we want to create. After the
colon `:` comes the dependency `src/default_config.json`, the original file.
Indented by one tab are the commands. Here we only use one command to copy the
file. This target says that if the target does not exist then it must be
created by executing the commands. The dependency indicates that if it has been
modified since last build it should also run the commands.

Invoking `make` now will run the one and only target available. Do it again and
it says there is nothing to be done. Change something in
`src/default_config.json` and try again. Now it has to copy it again.

To improve our Makefile we will make some more additions. Let's start with a
`clean` command.
```make
clean:
	rm -f output/default_config.json
```
I'm using `-f` to have it fail silently if there is nothing to remove. `clean`
depends on nothing and will therefore always run. Unless a file named `clean`
happens to exist. In that case it will never run because the target already
exists an no dependency will cause it to be rebuilt. To avoid collisions
between commands and filenames we can add `.PHONY: clean` to the makefile. Now
`clean` is never interpreted as a filename.

Next we add some commands to more easily continue building upon it later.
```make
all: copy_config

copy_config: output/default_config.json

.PHONY: all copy_config clean
```
With this we can invoke `make all` to do everything, placing it first will also
make it the default when invoking `make` without arguments. Building
`program.exe` could also be included as a dependency here. `make copy_config`
as short command for only copying the config. Finally, we add `all` and
`copy_config` to `.PHONY`.

In the end we are left with this:
```make
.PHONY: all copy_config clean

all: copy_config

copy_config: output/default_config.json

output/default_config.json: src/default_config.json
	cp src/default_config.json output/default_config.json

clean:
	rm -f output/default_config.json
```

Now you've gotten a little peek of the utility of Make. You can do much more
with variables, wildcards, parallel build tasks, ordered dependencies, and even writing
Make code; it is a Turing complete language (though not everything should be done in it).
